prācetasastu bhagavannaparo hi dakṣa-
stvatsevanaṃ vyadhita sargavivṛddhikāma: |
āvirbabhūvitha tadā lasadaṣṭabāhu-
stasmai varaṃ daditha tāṃ ca vadhūmasiknīm ||1||
prāceta:-tu	a son of Prachetas, indeed,
bhagavan-	O Lord!
aparo hi dakṣa:-	another Daksha (not Daksha Prajaapati)
tvat-sevanaṃ vyadhita	Thy worship performed
sarga-vivṛddhi-kāma:	the species to multiply desirous
āvirbabhūvitha tadā	Thou appeared then
lasat-aṣṭa-bāhu:-	with eight resplendent arms
tasmai varaṃ daditha	(and) gave the boon
tāṃ ca vadhūm-	and also that bride
asiknīm	(named) Asikni
The son of one of the Prachetas, another Daksha, indeed, desirous of multiplying the progeny, worshipped Thee. Then Thou appeared with eight resplendent arms and gave him a boon and also Asikni as wife.
tasyātmajāstvayutamīśa punassahasraṃ
śrīnāradasya vacasā tava mārgamāpu: |
naikatravāsamṛṣaye sa mumoca śāpaṃ
bhaktottamastvṛṣiranugrahameva mene ||2||
tasya-ātmajā:-	his sons
tu-ayutam-	indeed ten thousand
īśa	O Lord!
puna:-sahasraṃ	again (also) one thousand
śrīnāradasya vacasā	by the advice of Shree Naarada
tava mārgam-āpu:	took to Thy path (of meditation etc)
na-aikatra-vāsam-	(you) will not be residing in one place
ṛṣaye	to the sage (Naarada)
sa mumoca śāpaṃ	he (Daksha) gave the curse
bhakta-uttama:-tu-ṛṣi:-	highest of (Thy) devotees, the sage
anugraham-eva mene	took it for a blessing.
His eleven thousand sons, on the advice of Shree Naarada took to the path of devotion to Thee, to attain liberation. Daksha was displeased with Naarada and so pronounced a curse on him that he would not have any fixed place of residence. Sage Naarada, the highest of devotees, considered it only as blessing.
ṣaṣṭyā tato duhitṛbhi: sṛjata: kulaughān
dauhitrasūnuratha tasya sa viśvarūpa: |
tvatstotravarmitamajāpayadindramājau
deva tvadīyamahimā khalu sarvajaitra: ||3||
ṣaṣṭyā tata: duhitṛbhi:	then by ( his) sixty daughters
sṛjata: kula-aughān	(he) was multiplying the species
dauhitra-sūnu:-atha tasya	then one of his daughter's son's son
sa viśvarūpa:	that (named) Vishwaroopa
tvat-stotra-varmitam-	Thy protective hymn
ajāpayat-indram-	made Indra recite
ājau	in a battle
deva	O Lord!
tvadīya-mahimā	Thy glory
khalu sarvajaitra:	indeed is victorious over all
Then Daksha multiplied the species through his sixty daughters. His daughter's son's son named Vishwaroopa made Indra win the battle against the Asuras. Indra was provided protection and victory by learning from Vishwaroopa the hymn addressed to Thee (Naaraayana Kavacha). O Lord! Thy glory can indeed conquer all.
prākśūrasenaviṣaye kila citraketu:
putrāgrahī nṛpatiraṅgirasa: prabhāvāt |
labdhvaikaputramatha tatra hate sapatnī-
saṅghairamuhyadavaśastava māyayāsau ||4||
prāk-	once upon a time
śūrasena-viṣaye	in Shoorsena's kingdom
kila citraketu:	indeed, Chitraketu
putra-āgrahī nṛpati:	desirous of a son, the king
aṃgirasa: prabhāvāt	by sage Angirasa's blessings
labdhvā-eka-putram-	getting one son
atha tatra hate sapatnīsaṅghai:-	then, there (the son) was killed by the other wives
amuhyat-avaśa:-	and overcome by grief, he fainted
tava māyayā asau	owing to the power of Thy Maayaa
Once upon a time, in the kingdom named Shoorsena the king Chitraketu was desirous of getting a son. By the blessings of sage Angirasa he got a son. The child was killed by his other wives out of jealousy. The king fainted with grief owing to the power of Thy Maayaa.
taṃ nāradastu samamaṅgirasā dayālu:
samprāpya tāvadupadarśya sutasya jīvam |
kasyāsmi putra iti tasya girā vimohaṃ
tyaktvā tvadarcanavidhau nṛpatiṃ nyayuṅkta ||5||
taṃ nārada:-tu	him, Naarada then
samam-aṅgirasā	along with Angirasa
dayālu:	merciful (Naarada)
samprāpya	approaching
tāvat-upadarśya	then showed
sutasya jīvam	the son's soul
kasya-asmi putra(:) iti	whose son am I, thus
tasya girā	by his speech
vimohaṃ tyaktvā	giving up delusion
tvat-arcana-vidhau	in the ways of Thy worship
nṛpatiṃ nyayuṅkta	gave instructions to the king
The merciful Naarada and sage Angirasa went to Chitraketu and showed him the soul of his dead son. The soul asked 'whose son am I?' These words dispelled the king's delusion. The sages then instructed him in the ways of Thy worship.
stotraṃ ca mantramapi nāradato'tha labdhvā
toṣāya śeṣavapuṣo nanu te tapasyan |
vidyādharādhipatitāṃ sa hi saptarātre
labdhvāpyakuṇṭhamatiranvabhajadbhavantam ||6||
stotraṃ ca mantram-api	hymns and Mantras
nāradata:-atha labdhvā	from Naarada then receiving
toṣāya śeṣa-vapuṣa:	for propitiation of (Thee) (who were) in the form of Aadishesha
nanu te tapasyan	practising austerities to Thee alone
vidyādhara-adhipatitāṃ	the leadership of Vidyaadharas
sa hi sapta-rātre labdhvā-	he obtained only in seven days
api-akuṇṭhamati:-	still dissatisfied
anvabhajat-bhavantam	(he) continued to worship Thee
Then receiving hymns and Mantras from Naarada, he practised austerities for propitiating Thee who were in the form of Aadishesha. Within seven days he obtained the leadership of the Vidyaadharas. Still dissatisfied, he continued to worship Thee with the same fervour.
tasmai mṛṇāladhavalena sahasraśīrṣṇā
rūpeṇa baddhanutisiddhagaṇāvṛtena |
prādurbhavannacirato nutibhi: prasanno
datvā''tmatattvamanugṛhya tirodadhātha ||7||
tasmai	to him (Chitraketu)
mṛṇāla-dhavalena	as white as a lotus stalk
sahasra-śīrṣṇā	with a thousand heads
rūpeṇa	in (such a) form
baddhanuti-siddhagaṇa-āvṛtena	singing hymns of praises,by Sidhdhas, surrounded
prādurbhavan-acirata:	quickly manifested
nutibhi: prasanna:	with the hymns pleased
datvā-ātma-tattvam-	imparting knowledge of self
anugṛhya	and blessing (him)
tirodadhātha	Thou disappeared
Presently Thou revealed Thyself to him in Thy form of Aadishesha, with a thousand hoods and white like a lotus stalk,surrounded by bands of Sidhdhaas singing hymns of praise. Pleased with the hymns, Thou blessed him and imparted to him the knowledge of the self and then Thou disappeared.
tvadbhaktamauliratha so'pi ca lakṣalakṣaṃ
varṣāṇi harṣulamanā bhuvaneṣu kāmam |
saṅgāpayan guṇagaṇaṃ tava sundarībhi:
saṅgātirekarahito lalitaṃ cacāra ||8||
tvat-bhakta-mauli:-atha sa-	the greatest of devotees ,he, then
api ca	and also
lakṣa-lakṣaṃ varṣāṇi	for many many years
harṣula-manā	happily (blissfully)
bhuvaneṣu	in all the worlds
kāmam saṅgāpayan	made to be sung
guṇagaṇaṃ tava	Thy glories
sundarībhi:	by beautiful Vidyaadharis
saṅga-atireka-rahita:	without much sensuous attachment
lalitaṃ cacāra	happily wandered about
This great devotee Chitraketu for many many years wandered about happily in all the worlds without much attachment. He led the troupe of beautiful Vidyaadharis and also caused Thy glories and excellences to be sung, to his hearts content.
atyantasaṅgavilayāya bhavatpraṇunno
nūnaṃ sa rūpyagirimāpya mahatsamāje |
niśśaṅkamaṅkakṛtavallabhamaṅgajāriṃ
taṃ śaṅkaraṃ parihasannumayābhiśepe ||9||
atyanta-saṅga-vilayāya	to rid (himself) of all sensuous hankerings
bhavat-praṇunna: nūnaṃ	prompted by Thee, it seems,
sa rūpyagirim-āpya	he, reaching the Silver mountain (Kailaash)
mahat-samāje	in the assembly of sages
niśśaṅkam-	without any inhibition
aṅka-kṛta-vallabham-	who had seated his consort on his lap
aṅgajāriṃ taṃ śaṅkaraṃ	the destroyer of Kaamdeva, that Shankara
parihasan-	ridiculing (him)
umayā-abhiśepe	was cursed by Umaa
To rid himself completely of all sensuous hankerings, prompted by Thee, he once went to Mount Kailaash. There he saw the destroyer of Kaamadeva , Shankara, sitting in the assembly of sages with his consort Umaa seated on his lap without any concern. Chitraketu mocked at him and in turn was cursed by Umaa.
nissambhramastvayamayācitaśāpamokṣo
vṛtrāsuratvamupagamya surendrayodhī |
bhaktyātmatattvakathanai: samare vicitraṃ
śatrorapi bhramamapāsya gata: padaṃ te ||10||
nissambhrama:-	unperturbed
tu-ayam-	however, he (Chitraketu)
ayācita-śāpa-mokṣa:	did not ask for relief from the curse
vṛtrāsuratvam-upagamya	as vritraasura being born
surendra-yodhī	against Indra fighting
bhaktyā-	by his devotion
ātmatattva-kathanai:	and by imparting knowledge of the self
samare	in the battle,
vicitraṃ	surprisingly,
śatro:-api bhramam-	the delusion of the enemy also
apāsya	removing
gata: padaṃ te	reached Thy abode
Unperturbed, Chitraketu did not ask for relief from the curse, and was born as Vritraasura. By his devotion, while fighting in the battle against Indra, he imparted the knowledge of the self to Indra and he removed the delusion of even his enemy. Thereby he reached Thy abode. What a wonder!
tvatsevanena ditirindravadhodyatā'pi
tānpratyutendrasuhṛdo maruto'bhilebhe |
duṣṭāśaye'pi śubhadaiva bhavanniṣevā
tattādṛśastvamava māṃ pavanālayeśa ||11||
tvat-sevanena	by worshipping Thee
diti:-	Diti
indra-vadha-udyatā-api	though wanting to kill Indra
tān-pratyuta-	them, instead,
indra-suhṛda: maruta:-	Indra's friends Maruts
abhilebhe	begot
duṣṭa-āśaye-api	even for evil mind persons
śubhadā-eva	Thy worship
bhavat-niṣevā	gives good only
tat-tādṛśa:-tvam-	Thou who are thus
ava māṃ	protect me
pavana-ālaya-īśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Diti, the mother of the Asuras, worshipped Thee in order to have a son who would kill Indra, but instead gave birth to Maruts who became friends of Indra. By worshipping Thee, even an evil minded person receives good only. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who are like that, deign to protect me.